---
title: IETF Plenary List Management Procedures
abbrev: IETF Lists
docname: draft-lear-no-more-dog-pile-on-the-rabbit-00
submissionType: IETF
category: bcp
updates: rfc9245, rfc3934
obsoletes: rfc3683
ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: E. Lear
    name: Eliot Lear
    org: Cisco Systems
    street: Richtistrasse 7
    code: CH-8304
    city: Wallisellen
    country: Switzerland
    phone: "+41 44 878 9200"
    email: lear@lear.ch
 -
    ins: R. Wilton
    name: Robert Wilton
    org: Cisco Systems
    email: rwilton@cisco.com

normative:
   
informative:


--- abstract

This memo provides a procedure and authority to address inappropriate
behavior on IETF plenary lists.  It updates obsoletes RFC 3683 and
updates RFC 9245.


--- middle

Introduction
============

The charter for the IETF discussion list is layed out in {{!RFC9245}}.
Individuals are expected to behave at all times in a professional
manner for the purposes of the organization, as specified in
{{!RFC3935}}, and for the purposes of individual mailing lists.

Thankfully the need to take action against individuals is relatively
rare. Experience has shown that when the existing procedure is invoked,
the procedure itself causes as many problems as it solves, including:

* Community discussion drawing away from the fundamental mission of the
  organization;
* Humiliation the individual who has behaved inappropriately;
* The need for a committee draws from scarce volunteer resources from
  other potentially more fruitful activities;
* Consumption of IESG resources.

## Goals

For these reasons, a new approach that aligns with other professional
bodies is specified. The goals of the approach address the problems
above as follows:

* Minimize inappropriate behavior.
* Maximize appropriate participation in IETF activities.
* Minimize volunteer resources necessary to address inappropriate
  behavior.
* Allow for approaches that are tailored to each situation.
* Limit humiliation of those who have offended.
* Provide a right of appeal.
* Provide for transparency.

## Summary of changes

The following changes are made to IETF policy:

* {{!RFC3686}} and all processes therein are obsoleted by the new process
  that vests authority in the executive director.
* Only the moderation function in Section 3 of {{!RFC9245}} is obsoleted.
* Additional authority is given to the executive director to address
  other IETF mailing lists in limtied circumstances.  Thus {{!RFC3934}}
  is updated accordingly.

What is and is not acceptable behavior has not changed.

## Why shift this function from the community to the executive director?

The previous policy required that a discussion take place within the
community to ban an individual.  Those discussions have proven to be
both long, meandering, emotional, and time consuming.  The reason we
have juries is so that the public needn't vote in a popularity contest
about whether someone should be convicted.

The executive director is in a position to address complaints and
observe bad behavior outside the melee of any particular technical
discussion, because they carry no agenda other than the aims of the
organization.  In addition, as a managerial arm of the IETF, the
executive director has the capabilities to manage what are sometimes
difficult personal situations.

Finally, the executive director is in a position to engage and make
decisions in an effective manner, without consuming inordinate
amounts of community resources.

# Mailing List Policy

## Applicability

This policy applies to all IETF plenary lists mentioned in {{RFC9245}}.
In addition, certain aspects of this policy may be applied across all
IETF lists, as stated below.

## What is appropriate or inappropriate behavior?

{{!RFC9245}} describes both appropriate and inappropriate
contributions to the IETF list, and lays out charters of other plenary
lists.  Any new plenary lists created shall contain a statement as to
what the list is to be used for.  Messages beyond that purpose are
inappropriate, as are messages that violate our community standards as
specified by {{!RFC7776}}, {{!RFC8716}}, and {{!BCP54}}.

## Initiating Complaints

Complaints against individuals shall be transmitted to the executive
director via a mailing list \[TBD\].  Complaints must not be sent to
other IETF mailing lists.  The executive director may also take action
on their own initiative.

It is beyond the scope of ANY mailing list to discuss the behavior of
an individual, except for the purposes of reviewing this policy, in
which case a separate mailing list shall be designated by the IESG for
that purpose.

## Who is responsible for addressing inappropriate messages?

The executive director of the IETF shall be responsible for addressing
inappropriate messages.  The executive director may delegate this function.
The moderation function described in Section 3 of {{!RFC9245}} is
discontinued.

The executive director may consult with members of the community,
including but not limited to area directors, working group chairs, and
IETF participants; in order to seek a good outcome.

## What actions may be taken? {#actions}

The executive director shall take any action they deem appropriate in
a given circumstance, including but not limited to advising, warning,
moderating, rate-limiting, suspending, or banning individuals.  In
performing this function, the executive director should apply all
appropriate processes specified by the IETF in relevant BCPs in an
evenhanded way, using the least amount of intervention necessary to
satisfy the goals in [](#introduction).

The executive director MAY, in consultations with the IESG, apply any
action taken across ALL IETF mailing lists.  However, posting rights
limitations across all IETF lists should be viewed as an absolute last
resort.

## Community Notice

When the executive director takes an action in accordance with this
policy, they shall inform the IESG by email.  In the case of bans or
suspensions, this notification shall be noted and minuted in the next
IESG meeting.  In cases where an individual is banned or suspended
from any working group list, notice shall be given to either the
impacted working group or to IETF-Announce.

## Appeals

Individuals may appeal the decisions taken by the executive director,
as specified in [](#actions).  Appeals follow a fairly usual IETF
appeals process and timeline, as follows.  Any initial appeal should
be made to the executive director, and if the appeallant is unhappy
with the outcome of the appeal decision, they may escalate the
complaint to the IESG, and finally the IAB, as described in
{{!RFC2026}}.  Appeals must be made within one month of receiving
initial notification of the moderation action, or subsequent appeal
outcome.  In taking any action, the executive director shall notify the
offender of these rights.

## Review

An individual who has been moderated, rate-limited, suspended, or
banned from a list within the scope of this policy may apply to the
executive director to restore normal posting rights after a period of
twelve months, and every twelve months thereafter.  At their sole
discretion, the executive director may reinstate some or all posting
priveleges to an individual.  Such decisions are not subject to
appeal.

# Handling of Spam, Phishing, and other automated messages

The executive director may take any action they deem appropriate to
limit spam, phishing, and other such automated attacks.  They shall
inform the IETF community of the mechanisms in place to the extent
that sensible operational security permits.


# Informational Collection and Reporting

The executive director shall collect and report aggregate statistics
annually to the community about complaints received and their disposition.

# LLC Considerations

The IETF requests that, if requested by the executive director,
sufficient resources be allocated for this purpose.

# Privacy Considerations

This policy attempts to limit exposure of the names of individuals
accused of inappropriate behavior.  However, the transparency needs of
the organization demand that the community be informed of certain
actions taken against individuals.  This permits community oversight
of the function without causing undue embarressment or humiliation.

# Security Considerations

This memo creates no new technical mechanisms and therefore there
are no security considerations.

# IANA Considerations

\[This section to be removed by RFC Editor.\]

No registries are requested.

# Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank Marshall Rose for having first
addressed this difficult subject in our series, as well as all those
who have served as moderators and ombudspeople.

--- back


Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================

\[\[This section to be removed by RFC Editor\]\]

